>> Brangham: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, AUGUST 14:
VIOLENT PROTESTS IN MILWAUKEE
AFTER POLICE SHOOT AND KILL A
MAN POLICE SAY WAS ARMED AND
FLEEING.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, ONE
MAN'S CAMPAIGN TO RID THE OCEANS
OF PLASTICS.
>> AT FIRST A LOT OF PEOPLE TOLD
ME IT WAS NOT POSSIBLE, BUT THE
ONLY WAY TO FIND OUT IS TO
ACTUALLY TRY AND GO AND DO IT.
>> Brangham: AND, THE MOST
DECORATED ATHLETE IN OLYMPIC
HISTORY, MICHAEL PHELPS, CALLS
IT A CAREER.
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
WILLIAM BRANGHAM.
>> Brangham: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THERE IS NO RELIEF IN SIGHT
ALONG THE FLOOD-RAVAGED GULF
COAST OF LOUISIANA AND
MISSISSIPPI TODAY.
THE NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE HAS
EXTENDED FLOOD WATCHES FOR PARTS
OF SOUTHEASTERN LOUISIANA
THROUGH THIS EVENING, FOLLOWING
THREE DAYS OF RELENTLESS
RAINFALL THAT SENT MANY RIVERS
FLOWING OVER THEIR BANKS.
FORECASTERS SAY MORE THAN 20
INCHES HAVE FALLEN OVER THE LAST
FEW DAYS.
WHAT LOUISIANA GOVERNOR JOHN BEL
EDWARDS CALLS "HISTORIC" AND
"UNPRECEDENTED" FLOODING HAS NOW
CLAIMED AT LEAST THREE LIVES.
THE GOVERNOR SAID TODAY THE
NUMBER OF RESCUES FROM HOMES AND
STRANDED CARS HAS RISEN SHARPLY
TO MORE THAN 7,000 PEOPLE AND
500 PETS.
>> EVEN WITH THE SUNSHINE OUT
TODAY INTERMITTENTLY, THE WATERS
ARE GOING TO CONTINUE RISE IN
MANY AREAS AND SO THIS IS NO
TIME TO LET THE GUARD DOWN, WE
ACTUALLY HAVE TO REMAIN
VIGILANT.
>> OH MY GOD, I'M DROWNING!
>> WE'RE COMING!
>> Brangham: IN ONE DRAMATIC
RESCUE NEAR BATON ROUGE, A MAN
PULLED A WOMAN FROM HER CAR THAT
WAS FULLY SUBMERGED IN
FLOODWATERS, AND THEN WENT BACK
UNDERWATER TO SAVE THE WOMAN'S
DOG.
A LOUISIANA EMERGENCY OFFICIAL
SAYS MORE THAN 5,000 FLOOD
EVACUEES ARE STAYING IN
SHELTERS.
CALM IS RETURNING TO MILWAUKEE
AFTER A NIGHT OF VIOLENT
PROTESTS OVER THE FATAL POLICE
SHOOTING YESTERDAY AFTERNOON OF
A MAN WHO POLICE SAY WAS ARMED
AND FLED A TRAFFIC STOP.
EVEN SO, WISCONSIN GOVERNOR
SCOTT WALKER HAS ACTIVATED THE
NATIONAL GUARD TO HELP MILWAUKEE
LAW ENFORCEMENT, IF NEEDED, KEEP
THE PEACE.
THE PROTESTS ERUPTED AFTER AN
OFFICER FATALLY SHOT THE SUSPECT
IN A PREDOMINANTLY AFRICAN-
AMERICAN NEIGHBORHOOD.
MILWAUKEE'S POLICE CHIEF
IDENTIFIED HIM AS 23-YEAR-OLD
SYLVILLE SMITH AND SAID HE HAD A
QUOTE "LENGTHY ARREST RECORD."
THE POLICE CHIEF TOLD REPORTERS
TODAY SMITH DID NOT OBEY ORDERS
TO DROP HIS WEAPON-- WHICH WAS A
STOLEN HANDGUN LOADED WITH 23
ROUNDS OF AMMUNITION.
THE MILWAUKEE JOURNAL-SENTINEL
REPORTS THE OFFICER WAS ALSO
BLACK, CITING POLICE SOURCES.
AFTER THE SHOOTING, PROTESTERS
HURLED ROCKS AND BRICKS, SMASHED
WINDOWS OF TWO POLICE CARS, AND
SET FIRE TO A GAS STATION AND
OTHER BUSINESSES.
ONE POLICE OFFICER WAS HIT IN
THE HEAD WITH A BRICK, AND
POLICE ARRESTED AT LEAST THREE
PROTESTERS.
THE MILWAUKEE DISTRICT ATTORNEY
HAS OPENED AN INVESTIGATION INTO
THIS SHOOTING, AND THE OFFICER
INVOLVED HAS BEEN PLACED ON
ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE.
TURNING TO THE PRESIDENTIAL
RACE, TODAY DONALD TRUMP'S
RUNNING MATE-- INDIANA GOVERNOR
MIKE PENCE-- DISMISSED A LETTER
ISSUED LAST WEEK BY 50 FORMER
NATIONAL SECURITY OFFICIALS, ALL
FROM REPUBLICAN ADMINISTRATIONS,
WHO ARGUED THAT TRUMP IS TOO
RECKLESS TO BE TRUSTED AS
COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF.
PENCE TOLD FOX NEWS THAT THE GOP
ESTABLISHMENT LEVIED SIMILAR
CRITICISMS OF CANDIDATE RONALD
REAGAN BACK IN 1980.
PENCE ALSO CALLED FOR AN
INVESTIGATION OF CONTRIBUTIONS
TO THE CLINTON FOUNDATION--
PARTICULARLY THE DONATIONS
RECEIVED WHILE HILLARY CLINTON
SERVED AS PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
SECRETARY OF STATE.
>> THE PUBLIC HAS A RIGHT TO
KNOW, REALLY AND TRULY, THIS IS
EXACTLY THE KIND OF PAY TO PLAY
POLITICS THAT THE AMERICAN
PEOPLE ARE SICK AND TIRED OF.
BUT FRANKLY IT IS JUST ONE MORE
EXAMPLE OF THE WAY I DO BELIEVE
THE CLINTONS HAVE BEEN OPERATING
FOR OVER 30 YEARS.
>> Brangham: THIS REQUEST
FOLLOWS THE RELEASE BY THE GROUP
JUDICIAL WATCH OF 296 PAGES OF
EMAILS IT OBTAINED IN A FREEDOM
OF INFORMATION ACT REQUEST FROM
THE STATE DEPARTMENT.
THE CLINTON CAMPAIGN HAS SAID
SHE NEVER TOOK ACTION AS
SECRETARY OF STATE BECAUSE OF
DONATIONS TO THE FOUNDATION.
LEARN WHY THE AEDES AEGYPTEE
MOSQUITO TRANSMITS THE ZIKA
VIRUS BETTER THAN NEARLY 200
OTHER SPECIES IN THE U.S. VISIT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
AT THE OLYMPIC GAMES IN RIO, THE
U.S. OLYMPIC COMMITTEE CONFIRMS,
AMERICAN SWIMMER RYAN LOCHTE AND
THREE TEAMMATES WERE ROBBED AT
GUNPOINT EARLY THIS MORNING BY
MEN POSING AS POLICE OFFICERS
WHO HAD STOPPED THEIR TAXI EN
ROUTE TO THE OLYMPIC VILLAGE.
NONE OF THE SWIMMERS WAS
INJURED.
LOCHTE HAS 12 OLYMPIC MEDALS,
SECOND ONLY IN U.S. MEN'S
SWIMMING TO HIS TEAMMATE,
MICHAEL PHELPS, WHO SAYS HE IS
RETIRING FROM COMPETITION-- FOR
GOOD, THIS TIME.
THIS COMES AFTER PHELPS WON HIS
RECORD 23rd GOLD MEDAL LAST
NIGHT-- HIS FIFTH GOLD IN RIO--
SWIMMING THE BUTTERFLY LEG ON
THE U.S. TEAM'S 4 x 100 METER
MEDLEY RELAY.
OVERALL, FROM ATHENS TO BEIJING,
LONDON AND RIO, PHELPS HAS WON
28 OLYMPIC MEDALS, THE MOST EVER
FOR ANY ATHLETE IN ANY SPORT.
JOINING ME NOW VIA SKYPE FROM
RIO TO DISCUSS HIS INCREDIBLE
CAREER IS NEW YORK TIMES
REPORTER KAREN CROUSE.
KAREN, WE ARE JUST RUNNING OUT
OF SUPERLATIVES TO DESCRIBE THIS
INCREDIBLE CAREER OF MICHAEL
PHELPS.
CAN YOU HELP PUT HIS
ACHIEVEMENTS INTO SOME CONTEXT
FOR US?
>> Reporter: HE'S NOT JUST A
ONCE-IN-A-GENERATION SWIMMER.
HE'S A ONCE-IN-EVERY-10
GENERATION SWIMMER, OR ATHLETE,
FOR THAT MATTER.
IT REALLY IS HARD TO WRAP YOUR
HEAD AROUND 28 OLYMPIC MEDALS
WHEN YOU KNOW HOW HARD IT IS TO
WIN A SINGLE ONE.
MICHAEL LAST NIGHT CALLED IT
INSANE, AND I THINK THAT'S AS
GOOD A SUPERLATIVE AS ANYTHING I
CAN COME UP WITH.
>> Brangham: 31 YEARS OLD, FOR
MOST OF US MORTALS, IS PRETTY
YOUNG, BUT NOT FOR AN ELITE
SWIMMER.
HOW DO YOU EXPLAIN HOW HE IS
ABLE TO KEEP THIS INCREDIBLE
RECORD GOING?
>> HE HAS PUT IN THE WORK.
HE HAS A HUGE APPETITE FOR WORK,
SO I THINK IT STARTS THERE.
HE HAS WONDERFUL TALENT.
HIS LONG TORSO AND SHORT LEGS,
BUT I THINK YOU SAW IN A COUPLE
OF HIS RACES IN RIO WHAT HIS
WILL TO WIN IS.
HE GUTTED OUT THAT FLY.
I STILL DON'T KNOW HOW HE WON
IT.
HE WAS SEIZING UP IN THE FINAL
10 METERS, AND I KNOW THAT FEEL.
HE SOMEHOW FOUND A WAY TO GET
HIS HANDS TO THE WALL FIRST.
IT REALLY SPEAKS TO THE
COMPETITIVE INSTINCT.
>> Brangham: PHELPS' RETURN TO
THE PODIUM, CERTAINLY WASN'T
GUARANTEED, ESPECIALLY HERE IN
RIO.
FOR PEOPLE WHO DON'T REMEMBER,
CAN YOU REMIND US OF SOME OF THE
DEVIATIONS HIS CAREER-- MAYBE
YOU CALL THEM RUTS-- HE WENT
INTO THAT COULD HAVE REALLY
STUNTED HIS PROGRESS.
>> THE YEAR AFTER BEIJING, HE
WAS AT A PARTY WITH A FEW
FRIENDS.
EVERYONE IN THAT ROOM HE THOUGHT
WAS A FRIEND, AND THERE WAS A
MARIJUANA BONG IN PLAY, AND THAT
PICTURE GOT OUT.
SO THAT WAS THE FIRST BLEMISH.
THEN HE HAD A D.U.I., AND A
SECOND D.U.I. IN 2014, AND THAT
WAS REALLY THE TURNING POINT FOR
MICHAEL.
BECAUSE AFTER THAT SECOND
D.U.I., HE WENT INTO RECOVERY, A
SIX-WEEK PROGRAM AT THE MEADOWS
IN ARIZONA.
AND IT IS ASTONISHING THE
DIFFERENCE IN HIM.
IT'S ALMOST AS IF HE IS A
DIFFERENT PERSON.
HE'S THE SAME SWIMMER BUT A
COMPLETELY DIFFERENT PERSON, SO
MUCH MORE SELF-AWARE, AND SO
MUCH MORE COMFORTABLE.
>> Brangham: AS PHELPS LEAVES
THE WORLD STAGE AND LEAVES
PROFESSIONAL SWIMMING,
APPARENTLY, WHAT IS HIS LEGACY
ON THE SPORT ITSELF?
>> I BELIEVE WHAT HE'S DONE IN
JUST BRINGING MORE PEOPLE FROM
MORE COUNTRIES TO SPORTS.
THERE WERE SO MANY WHEN THERE
WERE SIX OR SEVEN COUNTRIES
REPRESENTED IN THE TOP EIGHT.
I CAN REMEMBER A TIME WHEN THAT
WAS NOT THE CASE.
THERE WOULD HAVE BEEN FOUR
COUNTRIES AT THE MOST.
SO WE OWE THAT TO MICHAEL, I
BELIEVE.
HE HAD SO MANY SWIMMERS COME UP
TO HIM DURING THE COURSE OF THIS
COMPETITION AND SHARE WITH HIM,
YOU KNOW, I GOT MY PICTURE TAKEN
WITH YOU WHEN I WAS SIX."
"I GOT MY PICTURE TAKEN WITH YOU
WHEN I WAS NINE."
KATIE LEDECKY HAD HER PICTURE
TAKEN WITH HIM WHEN SHE WAS
NINE.
THE SWIMMER WHO FINISHED FIFTH
HAD HER PICTURE TAKEN WITH
MICHAEL AT A MEET IN JAPAN WHEN
HE WAS EIGHT.
THESE ARE PEOPLE IN THE SPORT
LARGELY BECAUSE MICHAEL INSPIRED
THEM TO TAKE IT UP.
HE MADE SWIMMING LOOK COOL.
AND IN MY MIND, THAT'S HIS
LASTING LEGACY.
>> Brangham: ALREADY, KAREN
CROUSE FOR THE "NEW YORK TIMES,"
THANK YOU FOR YOUR REPORTING AND
THANK YOU FOR TALKING WITH US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Brangham: AS WE MAKE AND USE
MORE AND MORE PLASTIC GLOBALLY,
THE AMOUNT OF PLASTIC GARBAGE
ENDING UP IN OUR WATERS HAS
INCREASED DRAMATICALLY.
THE UNITED NATIONS ESTIMATES
PLASTIC WASTE ALONE CAUSES $13
BILLION IN DAMAGE TO MARINE
ECOSYSTEMS EVERY YEAR.
THIS SUMMER, A MOSTLY-PRIVATELY
FUNDED PROJECT LAUNCHED ITS
FIRST MAJOR TEST TO TRY AND GET
SOME OF THAT PLASTIC OUT OF OUR
OCEANS AND SEAS.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S SASKIA
DEMELKER WENT TO THE NETHERLANDS
TO SEE HOW THIS MODEL MIGHT
WORK.
>> Reporter: 14 MILES OFF THE
COAST OF THE NETHERLANDS, BOYAN
SLAT IS CONDUCTING AN EXPERIMENT
TO RID THE WORLD'S WATERS OF
PLASTIC TRASH.
>> IT'S A PERFECT DAY TO INSTALL
A BARRIER.
WE'VE BEEN WORKING ON THIS FOR
QUITE A FEW YEARS, AND ACTUALLY
HAVING SOMETHING PHYSICAL IN THE
OCEAN THAT YOU CAN SEE WORK.
>> Reporter: THIS FLOATING
BARRIER IN THE NORTH SEA IS THE
FIRST TEST OF THIS DUTCH 22-
YEAR-OLD'S PROJECT THAT HE CALLS
"THE OCEAN CLEANUP."
>> ULTIMATELY, I HOPE THAT WE
CAN GET TO A FUTURE WHERE THE
OCEANS ARE CLEAN AGAIN.
I WOULD SAY THAT I THINK WITHIN
10 YEARS FROM NOW, WE WOULD
ALREADY BE REALLY CLOSE TO
GETTING CLEAN OCEANS AGAIN, AND
PERHAPS IN 20, 30 YEARS, I THINK
THE OCEANS CAN BE LIKE THEY WERE
IN PERHAPS THE 1950S, BEFORE WE
WERE USING PLASTIC AT THIS
SCALE.
>> Reporter: TO CALL THAT GOAL
AMBITIOUS WOULD BE AN
UNDERSTATEMENT.
ABOUT 9 MILLION TONS OF PLASTIC
ARE DUMPED INTO THE WORLD'S
OCEANS EVERY YEAR-- FROM
LITTERING ON BEACHES, FISHING
VESSELS DISPOSING OF OLD NETS,
AND IMPROPER WASTE MANAGEMENT.
THAT'S ENOUGH PLASTIC TO FILL A
FOOTBALL STADIUM AND RISE 23
MILES IN THE AIR.
SCIENTISTS EXPECT THE AMOUNT OF
PLASTIC TRASH IN THE OCEANS TO
DOUBLE IN THE NEXT DECADE AS
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
INCREASINGLY USE PLASTIC WITHOUT
ADEQUATE SYSTEMS TO RECYCLE IT.
NOT ONLY DO FISH AND MARINE
ANIMALS GET ENTANGLED IN
PLASTIC, THEY EAT IT.
>> IT'S VERY LIKELY THAT THAT
WAS BITES FROM A FISH WITH A
HARD BEAK OR IT COULD BE EVEN A
BABY TURTLE.
>> Reporter: JULIA REISSER IS
THE OCEAN CLEAN UP'S LEAD
OCEANOGRAPHER.
SHE SAYS IN WATER, PLASTIC
BREAKS DOWN INTO MICROSCOPIC
PIECES.
SO FISH INGEST PLASTIC PARTICLES
AND MAY PASS THE HARMFUL
CHEMICALS CONTAINED IN THEM
ALONG THE FOOD CHAIN.
THAT'S WHY IT'S CRITICAL TO
CAPTURE THE LARGE PIECES OF
PLASTIC BEFORE THEY BREAK DOWN.
>> QUANTIFYING THE
MICROPLASTICS, THE VERY TINY
PIECES, YOU PROBABLY ARE LOOKING
AT THE LEVELS OF PLASTIC
POLLUTION FROM A FEW DECADES
AGO.
SO IT'S LIKE CLIMATE CHANGE:
WHAT WE'RE DOING NOW WE MIGHT
FEEL IN A FEW DECADES TO COME.
SO WE SEE OUR OPERATIONS AS A
WAY TO INTERCEPT THE BIG
PLASTICS BEFORE IT BECOMES VERY
SMALL, TINY, MILLIMETER-SIZE
PLASTICS.
>> Reporter: ROTATING OCEAN
CURRENTS SUCK PLASTIC AND OTHER
TRASH INTO CONCENTRATED AREAS--
ONE OF THE LARGEST IS THE SO-
CALLED "GREAT PACIFIC GARBAGE
PATCH" LOCATED BETWEEN HAWAII
AND CALIFORNIA.
SCIENTISTS ESTIMATE THAT UP TO
170,000 TONS OF PLASTIC
ACCUMULATE HERE.
OCEAN GARBAGE PATCHES ARE VAST
BUT DISPERSED MAKING IT
DIFFICULT TO COLLECT OR EVEN SEE
THE PLASTIC.
LAST YEAR, "THE OCEAN CLEANUP"
DEPLOYED 30 VESSELS TO MAP MORE
THAN 21,000,000 SQUARE MILES OF
THE PACIFIC OCEAN AND COLLECT
DATA ON PLASTICS.
THE TEAM DISCOVERED MORE AND
LARGER PIECES OF PLASTIC THAN
EXPECTED.
>> WE GOT HUNDREDS OF TIMES MORE
PLASTIC THAN MARINE LIFE ON THE
SEA SURFACE OF THESE OCEANS.
>> Reporter: THERE'S MORE
PLASTIC THAN FISH?
>> YES, AT LEAST AT THE SEA
SURFACE OF THIS GARBAGE PATCH,
YES.
>> Reporter: BOYAN SLAT IS
FOCUSED ON CLEANING UP THIS
INFAMOUS PATCH.
HE WAS MOTIVATED SIX YEARS AGO,
WHEN HE WAS ON A FAMILY
VACATION.
>> I WAS 16-YEARS-OLD, AND I WAS
DIVING IN GREECE, AND THEN
SUDDENLY I REALIZED I CAME
ACROSS MORE PLASTIC BAGS THAN
FISH.
SO I THOUGHT, WELL, SOMEBODY
SHOULD DO SOMETHING ABOUT THIS.
AND THEN ONE DAY I REALIZED THAT
THESE CURRENTS BETWEEN HAWAII
AND CALIFORNIA ARE ROTATING, SO
THE PLASTIC DOESN'T STAY IN ONE
SPOT.
I THEN ASKED MYSELF, ' ¡HEY, WAIT
A MINUTE, WHY WOULD YOU GO
THROUGH THE OCEANS IF THE OCEANS
CAN ALSO MOVE THROUGH YOU?'
>> Reporter: IN OTHER WORDS,
SLAT WONDERED IF THE SAME OCEAN
CURRENTS THAT PUSHED THE PLASTIC
DEEP INTO THE OCEAN COULD BE
HARNESSED TO CLEAN IT UP.
SLAT CAME UP WITH THE IDEA TO
ANCHOR A STRUCTURE TO THE OCEAN
FLOOR SIMILAR TO AN OIL RIG-- A
PASSIVE BARRIER THAT COULD TRAP
PLASTICS.
>> THE OCEANIC CURRENTS MOVING
AROUND IS NOT AN OBSTACLE, IT'S
A SOLUTION.
>> Reporter: WHEN SLAT, AS A
COLLEGE FRESHMAN MAJORING IN
AEROSPACE ENGINEERING, PROMOTED
HIS IDEA IN THIS "TED TALK" FOUR
YEARS AGO, THE VIDEO WENT VIRAL.
AND WITH THOUSANDS OF
SUPPORTERS, HE DECIDED TO DROP
OUT OF COLLEGE TO START THE
OCEAN CLEAN UP.
WHAT WERE THE REACTIONS TO YOUR
IDEA AT THAT TIME?
>> AT FIRST A LOT OF PEOPLE TOLD
ME IT WAS NOT POSSIBLE. I
THOUGHT, WELL, I DON'T KNOW
WHETHER IT'S POSSIBLE, BUT THE
ONLY WAY TO FIND OUT IS TO
ACTUALLY TRY AND GO AND DO IT.
>> Reporter: THROUGH
CROWDSOURCING, HE RAISED $2.2
MILLION DOLLARS WITHIN 100 DAYS
AND NOW HAS ATTRACTED A STAFF
THAT INCLUDES DOZENS OF
SCIENTISTS AND ENGINEERS.
TWO YEARS AGO, SLAT CO-AUTHORED
A 528-PAGE REPORT WITH NEARLY
100 SCIENTISTS OUTLINING HOW HIS
VISION COULD WORK AND THEN BEGAN
TESTING SCALE MODEL BARRIERS IN
WAVE POOLS.
IN JUNE, HE BEGAN TESTING OUT AT
SEA.
THE FLEXIBLE BARRIER, AS SHOWN
IN THIS ANIMATION WILL FLOAT
ATOP THE OCEAN'S SURFACE, ITS
ARMS OUTSTRETCHED IN A "V"
SHAPE.
A RUBBER SCREEN WILL EXTEND SIX-
AND-A-HALF FEET BELOW WHICH THE
DESIGNERS CLAIM IS DEEP ENOUGH
TO CATCH PLASTICS, BUT SHALLOW
ENOUGH THAT MARINE LIFE CAN SWIM
UNDERNEATH IT.
AS PLASTIC ACCUMULATES IN THE
CENTER OF THE BARRIER, IT WILL
BE PULLED UP INTO A TOWER AND
STORED UNTIL IT CAN BE
TRANSPORTED BACK TO SHORE AND
RECYCLED.
>> IN THE NORTH SEA THE WAVES
AND CURRENTS ARE ACTUALLY
STRONGER THAN THOSE OUT IN THE
PACIFIC OCEAN.
THAT'S WHY THE OCEAN CLEANUP
TEAM IS TESTING THE STRUCTURAL
INTEGRITY OF THE FLOATING
BARRIER HERE FIRST.
>> SO WE HAVE THE BIG YELLOW
BUOYS THOSE ARE THE BUOYS THAT
WILL HOLD THE BARRIER.
>> Reporter: ALLARD VAN HOEKEN
IS AN OFFSHORE ENGINEER AND THE
PROJECT'S CHIEF OPERATING
OFFICER.
HE'S OVERSEEING THE YEAR LONG
BARRIER TEST.
WHAT DO YOU EXPECT FROM THIS
TEST HERE?
>> SO NOW WE'RE GOING TO SEE HOW
THE BARRIER WILL BEHAVE IN A
REAL OFFSHORE ENVIRONMENT, REAL
SEA CONDITIONS.
AND ALSO WE'RE GOING TO DO
TESTS.
SO WE'RE GOING TO DO A CAPTURING
TEST WITH THE FAKE PLASTIC, IT'S
NOT REAL PLASTIC, IT'S MADE OUT
OF CORN.
AND WE'RE GOING TO RELEASE IT
HERE IN FRONT OF THE BARRIER AND
SEE HOW THE BARRIER HOLDS THAT.
>> Reporter: AFTER THIS TEST,
VAN HOEKEN'S TEAM OF ENGINEERS
WILL SET THEIR SIGHTS ON THE
PACIFIC OCEAN, WHERE THEY HOPE
TO DEPLOY A FULL SCALE 62 MILE
BARRIER BY 2020.
>> TO PUT A STRUCTURE LIKE THIS
IN THE OCEAN FAR AWAY FROM THE
COAST, THOUSANDS OF MILES AWAY
IN AN AREA WHERE HUMANS HAVE NO
CONTROL AT ALL.
TO PLACE IT THERE, MAKE IT
SURVIVE YEAR AFTER YEAR.
THAT'S REALLY A LOT OF THINGS
TOGETHER THAT HAVE NEVER BEEN
DONE BEFORE.
>> Reporter: THE OCEAN CLEANUP
TEAM HAS YET TO SECURE FUNDING
FOR THE FULL SCALE BARRIER,
WHICH IT ESTIMATES WILL COST
HUNDREDS OF MILLIONS OF DOLLARS.
WHILE MOST OF BOYAN SLAT'S
FUNDING HAS COME FROM PRIVATE
DONATIONS THE DUTCH GOVERNMENT
RECENTLY GAVE $550,000 FOR THE
PROTOTYPE TEST.
SHARON DIJKSMA IS THE DUTCH
MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT.
>> WE DON'T HAVE A POCKET FULL
OF MONEY WAITING FOR BOYAN AFTER
THIS, BUT I THINK THE FIRST STEP
GETTING THE PROTOTYPE OUT AND TO
BE PAID FOR THAT WAS PROBABLY
THE HARDEST STEP.
WHEN THIS IS A SUCCESS, AND HE
IS GOING TO SCALE UP, I THINK
THE INVESTORS WILL STAND IN LINE
TO ASSIST HIM.
>> Reporter: BUT NICK MALLOS,
DIRECTOR OF THE "TRASH FREE
SEAS" PROGRAM AT THE OCEAN
CONSERVANCY IN WASHINGTON D.C.
IS AMONG THE SKEPTICS.
FROM WHAT YOU KNOW ABOUT THE
OCEAN CLEANUP PLAN, IS IT A
FEASIBLE PROPOSITION?
>> I THINK THERE ARE A LOT OF
FACTORS THAT ARE QUITE
CONCERNING.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT PUTTING THE
LARGEST MANMADE OBJECT EVER
KNOWN INTO AN OCEAN IN AN
ENVIRONMENT THAT IS ONE OF THE
MOST, IF NOT THE MOST, DYNAMIC
AND, AND DANGEROUS ECOSYSTEM ON
THE PLANET.
I THINK AT THE MOMENT WE BELIEVE
THE RISK OF CATASTROPHE
OUTWEIGHS THE POTENTIAL BENEFIT
OF PLASTICS EXTRACTION.
>> Reporter: BOYAN SLAT SAYS
THAT THAT RISK CAN BE MITIGATED.
THAT'S WHY THEY'RE TESTING
EXTENSIVELY.
MALLOS SAYS A MORE COST
EFFECTIVE LOW RISK APPROACH IS
TO SLOW PLASTIC CONSUMPTION AND
CAPTURE PLASTICS IN COASTAL
AREAS.
>> WE BELIEVE VERY STRONGLY THAT
WE SHOULD FOCUS ON STOPPING
DEBRIS AND PLASTICS FROM
ENTERING WATERWAYS AND THE OCEAN
AT ITS SOURCE THROUGH BEACH
CLEANUPS AND WATERWAY AND NEAR
SHORE CLEAN UPS AND REDESIGNING
AND MINIMIZING THE AMOUNT OF
WASTE THAT'S AVAILABLE TO EVER
ENTER THE SYSTEM.
>> I THINK THAT PREVENTION AND
CLEANUP IS HIGHLY COMPLEMENTARY.
BECAUSE ALREADY THERE IS A
MASSIVE AMOUNT OF PLASTIC IN THE
OCEAN, AND IT DOESN'T GO AWAY BY
ITSELF.
IT'S A DIRTY JOB, BUT SOMEONE'S
GOT TO DO IT, I SUPPOSE.
>> Brangham: RUSSIAN PRIME
MINISTER DMITRY MEDVEDEV SAID
FRIDAY THAT RUSSIA COULD BREAK
DIPLOMATIC TIES WITH UKRAINE
OVER WHAT IT SAYS WERE RECENT
UKRAINIAN ATTEMPTS TO SABOTAGE
INFRASTRUCTURE IN CRIMEA.
RUSSIA ANNEXED THE SMALL
UKRAINIAN PENINSULA TWO YEARS
AGO, PROMPTING AN INTERNATIONAL
OUTCRY.
ON THURSDAY, UKRAINE PUTS ITS
ARMY ON COMBAT ALERT, AFTER
REPORTS CAME IN THAT RUSSIA WAS
AMASSING THOUSANDS MORE TROOPS
AND EQUIPMENT IN CRIMEA.
JOINING ME NOW BY SKYPE FROM
MOSCOW TO DISCUSS THIS TENSE
SITUATION IS "WASHINGTON POST"
REPORTER ANDREW ROTH.
SO, ANDREW, I'VE BEEN READING
SOMEWHAT OBSERVERS ARE SAYING
THAT THIS RUSSIAN MILITARY
BUILDUP COULD BE PREPARATIONS
FOR A BIG, POSSIBLY SUBSTANTIAL
FIGHT, POSSIBLY INTO U.N.
SECURITY COUNCIL.
IS THAT YOUR SENSE OF WHAT'S
HAPPENING THERE?
>> WELL, I THINK IT'S A LITTLE
BIT EARLY TO JUMP TO ANY
CONCLUSIONS LIKE THAT.
THERE HAVE BEEN WARNINGS FROM
SOME OBSERVERS ABOUT IMPENDING
INVASIONS, SERIOUS INVASIONS
FROM RUSSIA INTO UKRAINE,
BASICALLY SINCE THE CONFLICT
BEGAN IN 2014.
BUT IT IS A FAIRLY SERIOUS
ESCALATION AT THE MOMENT IN
TERMS OF THE SORT OF SOURING OF
DIPLOMATICITIZE BETWEEN THE TWO
COUNTRIES.
AND RUSSIA HAS MOVED SOME FAIRLY
SUBSTANTIAL AMOUNT OF TANKS AND
ALSO CERTAIN OTHER WEAPONS INTO
CRIMEA.
THEY'RE HOLDING MILITARY
EXERCISES THERE AT THE MOMENT.
>> Brangham: RUSSIA SAYS IN
RECENT DAYS IT'S DISRUPTED
SEVERAL ATTEMPTS BY WHAT THEY
ARGUE ARE UKRAINIAN SPECIAL
FORCES TO GO IN AND SABOTAGE
SOMETHING INSIDE CRIMEA.
IS THERE EVIDENCE THOSE ATTACKS
WERE BEING PLANNED?
>> I THINK THIS IS DIFFICULT TO
TELL.
IT'S SORT OF A HE SAID-SHE SAID
SITUATION AT THE MOMENT.
THE RUSSIANS CAME OUT WITH THIS
SORT OF BOMBSHELL ACCUSATIONS
THIS WEEK THAT THE UKRAINIANS
HAD BEEN, THROUGH THEIR
INTELLIGENCE DIRECTOR, TRYING TO
CARRY OUT SOME HIGH-LEVEL
SABOTAGE ATTACKS, AND PUTIN
CALLED THEM TERRORIST ATTACKS.
BUT IN TERMS OF CONCRETE PROOF,
WE'RE NOT QUITE THERE YET.
WE'VE SEEN, THOUGH THE RUSSIANS
HAVE MADE PUBLIC BASICALLY A
CONFESSION BY YEVGENY POMOV, WHO
USED TO FIGHT IN UKRAINE AS A
MEMBER OF THE ARMED FORCES.
BUT IT'S NOT VERY CLEAR WHETHER
OR NOT ANY OF THE ALLEGATIONS
THAT THEY'VE MADE THAT HE'S A
MEMBER, SORT OF INTELLIGENCE
AGENT, ARE TRUE.
BUT WHAT IS CLEAR IS THAT THEY
MADE A DECISION BASED ON THAT TO
ESCALATE THIS AND FOR PUTIN TO
CALL IT A TERRORIST ATTACK.
IT'S SORT OF THE MOST SERIOUS
RHETORIC THEY COULD USE.
>> Brangham: IF THIS ISN'T FOR
A CONVENTIONAL INCURSION INTO
UKRAINE, WHAT ELSE MIGHT RUSSIA
BE UP TO?
>> I MEAN, THERE ARE SUGGESTIONS
THAT ONE THING THE RUSSIANS
MIGHT BE INTERESTED IN IS
INCREASING INSTABILITY, AS A
SORT OF MEANS TO GAIN LEVERAGE
IN INTERNATIONAL NEGOTIATIONS.
IT'S POSSIBLE THE RUSSIANS WANT
TO CHANGE THE WAY NEGOTIATIONS
ABOUT UKRAINE ARE RUN.
CURRENTLY IT'S IN THE CONTEXT OF
THE NORMANDY FOUR, WHICH IS
FRANCE, GERMANY, UKRAINE, AND
RUSSIA.
PRESIDENT PUTIN SAYS THAT'S NOT
POSSIBLE TO DO ANYMORE,
ALTHOUGH, IN UKRAINE, THEY SAY
THAT IT STILL IS.
ANOTHER THING THAT COULD BE
HAPPENING IS THE RUSSIANS HAVE
DECIDED THAT THAT HE WANT TO PUT
UKRAINE ON NOTICE, AND THAT THEY
DECIDED THAT THIS IS SORT OF THE
BEST WAY TO DO IT.
>> Brangham: ALL RIGHT, ANDREW
ROTH OF THE "WASHINGTON POST,"
THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR JOINING
US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Brangham: THE ISLAMIC
MILITANT GROUP BOKO HARAM HAS
RELEASED A VIDEO THAT PURPORTS
TO SHOW DOZENS OF THE NEARLY 300
NIGERIAN GIRLS IT ABDUCTED FROM
THEIR SCHOOL MORE THAN TWO YEARS
AGO.
IN THE VIDEO, POSTED TODAY TO
TWITTER, ONE OF THE GIRLS SAYS
THAT 40 OF THEM HAVE BEEN
MARRIED TO MILITANT MEN, AND
THAT SOME GIRLS HAVE BEEN KILLED
IN NIGERIAN AIR STRIKES AIMED AT
THE MILITANT CAMPS.
WHILE A MILITANT HELD HER
MICROPHONE, SHE ALSO APPEALED TO
THE NIGERIAN GOVERNMENT TO FREE
JAILED MEMBERS OF BOKO HARAM.
THE MILITANT IN THE VIDEO SAID
IF THE GOVERNMENT DOES NOT FREE
BOKO HARAM PRISONERS, THE
KIDNAPPED GIRLS WILL NEVER BE
RELEASED.
A SPOKESMAN FOR THE "BRING BACK
OUR GIRLS" CAMPAIGN-- AND ONE OF
THE GIRL'S MOTHERS-- SAID THE
VIDEO APPEARED TO BE AUTHENTIC.
218 GIRLS REMAIN MISSING.
NEW YORK CITY POLICE ARE
SEARCHING FOR THE KILLER WHO
GUNNED DOWN AN IMAM AND HIS
ASSISTANT IN BROAD DAYLIGHT NEAR
A QUEENS MOSQUE THAT SERVES THE
LOCAL BANGLADESHI MUSLIM
COMMUNITY.
POLICE SAY SECURITY CAMERA VIDEO
SHOWS BOTH VICTIMS WERE WEARING
TRADITIONAL MUSLIM RELIGIOUS
CLOTHING WHEN A MAN APPROACHED
THEM FROM BEHIND, SHOT THEM IN
THE HEAD, AND RAN AWAY.
BOTH MEN HAD JUST ATTENDED
AFTERNOON PRAYERS.
THE IMAM WAS CARRYING MORE THAN
A THOUSAND DOLLARS IN CASH,
WHICH WAS NOT TAKEN.
SOME MEMBERS OF THE COMMUNITY
ARE ASKING THE N.Y.P.D. TO TREAT
THE MURDERS AS A HATE CRIME, BUT
POLICE SAY NOTHING YET INDICATES
THE VICTIMS WERE TARGETED
BECAUSE OF THEIR FAITH.
A MILESTONE IN FLINT, MICHIGAN,
TODAY, THOUGH MOST RESIDENTS MAY
HARDLY BE AWARE OF IT.
THE FEDERAL "EMERGENCY
DECLARATION" FOR THE CITY'S
LEAD-TAINTED DRINKING WATER HAS
EXPIRED.
THE STATE WILL NOW PAY THE FULL
COST FOR SUPPLYING RESIDENTS'
BOTTLED WATER AND FILTERS FOR
THEIR TAPS.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAD BEEN
COVERING 75-PERCENT OF THOSE
COSTS, WHICH RAN TO THREE-AND-
HALF MILLION DOLLARS A MONTH.
FEDERAL HEALTH AND ENVIRONMENTAL
MONITORING PROGRAMS WILL
CONTINUE AS BEFORE.
>> Brangham: RETURNING TO RIO,
GOLF IS BACK AT THE SUMMER
OLYMPICS FOR THE FIRST TIME
SINCE THE ST. LOOSE GAMES OF
1904 AND SHE TODAY THE WINNER OF
GOLF'S FIRST GOLD MEDAL IN 112
YEARS WAS BRITAIN'S JUSTIN ROSE.
WITH A BIRDIE ON THE LAST HOLE,
HE BEAT STENSON, WHO SHOT A
BOGEY AND SETTLED FOR SILVER.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
"PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
I'M WILLIAM BRANGHAM.
GOOD NIGHT.